[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: I'm
sure that many of you,
like me, were alive
when the Soviet Missile
Crisis played out.
We hid under our
desks, wrung our hands,
and feared for our future.
Little did we stop
to think that there
were people on the other side
of the world feeling similarly.
This was the era of the
Cold War between the USA
and the former Soviet Union.
We could be made to believe
anything through our media,
so could the Soviets.
Today, we're going to
look behind the walls
of global deceit
and disinformation
through the eyes of a former
Soviet spy, Jack Barsky.
Jack, welcome.
Your book "Deep
Undercover," was, to me,
kind of a breakthrough
in getting behind
and understanding what was
happening back in that day,
but also the heart of
people who can choose
to go into this industry.
Because this is high risk.
This is dangerous.
It has a lot of loneliness,
a lot of darkness around it.
And your book, I thought,
did such a beautiful job
of detailing the growth of
a young boy into a young man
into a brilliant student, a
brilliant member of the party
that decided to
take this direction,
but the heart was very much
involved at the core of it.
>>JACK BARSKY: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: that was what
was so fascinating to me.
So first of all, I'm glad
to be speaking with you
at a time when there's
just so much disinformation
and division happening globally.
I mean, have you seen this--
I mean, in your own
experience, obviously,
you're from East
Germany, and then
trained in the Soviet Union,
and embedded illegally in the US
as a spy, so you've seen a lot.
Have you seen a time like
this with such blatant deceit
everywhere?
>>BARSKY: No.
Deceit was the order of the day
on the other side of the Iron
Curtain because the media,
whatever it was, radio, TV,
newspapers were controlled
by the party, by the state.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: were given
whatever the party
wanted you to understand.
Something like
that is today still
the case in China and in
some other dictatorial-type
countries.
But what's happening in the
West is disheartening in
that there used to be
an independent press.
There used to be people who
don't necessarily always take
sides every time they write
something or say something.
And now, what's happening,
it's very difficult
to distinguish between
the truth and a lie.
>>REGINA: This is what
I hear from everyone.
I mean, really, people
who have good hearts who
want to do the right thing,
some of them are, in this case,
conservative, and
some of them are
behind the liberals,
progressives, and Democrats,
all of them say the same thing.
I just don't even know
what to believe anymore.
>>BARSKY: And the
primary reason for that
is that we are now divided into
at least two ideological camps.
And I know what
ideology can do to you.
Ideology is a set
of beliefs that
excludes thinking to the
contrary of what's in that set.
So you see everything from
that ideological angle,
and that's how I-- that
was one of the foundations
for me signing up for
this high-risk profession.
>>REGINA: OK, what
I'm going to do
is we're going to have
a two-part conversation.
I want to get into, basically,
the making of a spy,
in this one, and your life.
And then, I want to get into
what you just brought up,
these two ideological camps.
And so we'll get into the
implications of all that,
and we're going to meet with
your lovely daughter Chelsea
and see the implications
of revelations,
my dad was a spy, on
your kids and kind
of psychospiritual
implications there.
So that will be part two.
So first of all, I want to get
into the area you were born in.
You were born in East Germany.
And during this time-- and
we'll get to that in your story.
There was a day you
were going touring,
and there was a wall, OK?
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Oops.
And so let's talk
about the world
you were born in in East
Germany post-World War II.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, it was four
years, almost exactly four
years after the end
of World War II,
and I was born in the Soviet
occupied area of Germany, which
was devastated.
I mean, as the Soviet army
came in marching from the East,
they destroyed everything
that was in their path.
And as Germany
then was defeated,
whatever was left over--
when it was useful,
was dismantled and shipped
back to the Soviet Union
for reparations,
as opposed to what
happened in the Western part,
where the Allies actually
helped Germany rebuild.
>>REGINA: Came in and
start to rebuild, yeah.
>>BARSKY: Rebuild.
We were wiped out.
And so this was a matter
of survival in those days.
It was about food, shelter,
clothing-- so the very basics.
And there wasn't a lot of
room for all the other stuff,
near the top of
Maslow's pyramid, where
you're talking about--
>>REGINA: Hierarchy
of needs, yeah.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, so emotional
needs and all that.
No, it was about
discipline and making sure
that your life can continue.
And that's how I was brought up.
>>REGINA: And let's
talk about your family.
Let's talk about your
mom and dad a little bit
and how the parties
started coming in,
a little bit about
your relationship
with your grandpa, which was
your actual heart connection.
>>BARSKY: Right, both of
my parents were teachers.
The East German rulers jointly--
they made a decision jointly
with the Russian occupational
forces to throw out everybody
in the education sector
who had any ties
to the Nazi party.
So they trained a phenomenal
number of people, young people,
to become teachers.
And so that's how they met,
and they were both teaching
in a small village.
And I was born at the time
when they were both teaching.
And being the
child of a teacher,
it adds additional performance
anxiety, too, right?
And he was an interesting
dichotomy between my two
set of grandparents.
My mother's parents never
once played with me.
My grandfather, my mother's
father was a forest ranger.
You would think that you
would take the little boy
out in the woods and so on.
Nothing ever.
When we visited
my other brother,
we were just sitting in a
corner, and we had to be quiet.
On the other hand, my father's
parents were much more warm.
And the only love I
felt within that family,
that includes father and mother,
came from my grandfather,
>>REGINA: Opa.
>>BARSKY: Opa, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So let's talk about the
family dynamics and the party.
And then, I want to get
to a place in your life
where you teasingly told
your mama, I'm too big.
I don't need you to kiss
me good night anymore.
And what started turning
in you at that point?
It still makes me
cry a little bit.
So let's talk about
the party first,
how they ended up being--
groomed your dad into the party.
>>BARSKY: Well, so my father
wanted to have a career.
And in those days-- now we're
talking about the early '50s
into the mid '50s, you
had to be a party member
if you wanted to go someplace.
>>REGINA: To excel at anything?
>>BARSKY: To be allowed to
excel at something, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And so this
is how he eventually
got his principal position in
another town to which we moved.
And eventually, he made it
even further in his career,
but that's when I had a
normal relationship with him.
And my mother sang at the
time in a church choir.
She had to quit that.
>>REGINA: Your dad was
very anti-Christianity,
religion of any kind.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, well, I
don't think he grew up
with any kind of religion.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: Remember, this
was during the war, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: And I
once found a Bible
in my grandparents' house,
and I started reading it.
And I didn't get
very far because you
don't read that book from
the beginning as a child.
But anyway, the party was
influential in every part
of life.
Even in kindergarten, we
were being indoctrinated
in a very soft, nice way.
>>REGINA: I was
reading that, and I
thought, what a nice
inducement into kindergarten,
with your little packet that
had the little sweets in it,
and the colored pencils
or crayons and so forth,
to make it a really special
day to enter into the system.
>>BARSKY: In kindergarten
and elementary school,
the focus was on
humanity and the fact
that we were growing
up in a humane society.
For instance, one of the good
things about this ideology
was that there was no racism.
>>REGINA: No racism.
>>BARSKY: There was no racism.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>BARSKY: Every
picture of young kids,
where they had more than one
kid-- there was one brown, one
white, and one yellow.
Now it's easy to be
not racist if you
don't have other racists
living next to you.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>BARSKY: Right?
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's an ideology.
>>BARSKY: Right.
But the party, I mean,
it was everywhere--
school, and kindergarten,
and on, and on, and on.
And ultimately, I think
it was at least 10%
of the adult population
were party members.
>>REGINA: And those are
the ones that advance?
Those are the ones that had--
>>BARSKY: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --little better food.
They had maybe even a car,
which your family did end up
with a car, right?
>>BARSKY: Yes, but
that was because
of my father's initiative.
He bought it used.
Now if there were--
for instance, the government
owned all real estate,
so if you wanted to
have a nicer flat,
you had to be in good standing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: There was total
control, pretty much,
with some minor exceptions
because they allowed
some entrepreneurship
up until the point
when the entrepreneurs
got too big,
then they were expropriated.
And they allowed a little
bit of church life,
but the church was
infested with Stasi agents.
>>REGINA: Well,
right, I mean, this
is one of the things
I found interesting
because your dad would
always call it fairy tales.
And I think it was
Saturday mornings,
you had a class that was
teaching you about religion?
And he made you quit?
>>BARSKY: Interestingly enough,
there was a voluntary class.
At the end, we
actually went to school
on Saturdays for a half day.
And at the end of
that half day, there
was a voluntary class
to teach religion.
>>REGINA: I thought
that was interesting.
>>BARSKY: And I was not
allowed to participate.
And there's this scene
in the book where
the friend of mine, whose
father was a policeman,
he was not allowed, either,
and we were listening.
What are they teaching in there?
We were curious, but dad just
said, don't worry about it.
This is all nonsense.
>>REGINA: It's all fairy tales.
>>BARSKY: Absolutely, yeah.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about that moment at home
that I mentioned a
little earlier, where
as-- what were you,
six or seven years old?
you were quite young.
And you said to your
mom, I don't need you
to kiss me goodnight anymore.
>>BARSKY: This is
secondary memory.
The reason I know this
because she would tell people
over and over again, and
sometimes in my presence,
how mature I was at a young age.
She was proud of me.
And so it was the case
that, at one point,
she tried to kiss me good night.
And I said, hey,
mom, I'm old enough.
I don't need a
good-night kiss anymore.
And I tried to be funny.
I have this little--
>>REGINA: Impish part of you.
>>BARSKY: Yes, I do.
And I see this in
my last daughter.
She's just the same way.
She would say things
she doesn't mean, just
to be funny and entertaining.
And I tried to be funny,
and that backfired,
because she took it seriously.
And she said, OK, and she turned
around, turned the lights off.
And here I was all by myself.
All I wanted was a hug.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: Right?
>>REGINA: You were just teasing.
>>BARSKY: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: But that ended.
>>BARSKY: If that happened
to me today with my children,
I would say, you little
stinker, I'm just
going to hug you even harder.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
>>BARSKY: That's exactly
what they want anyway.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And because there was kind of
an absent of this warm and fuzzy
affection anyway, when
that last ritual left,
there wasn't a lot left on an
emotionally supportive level.
>>BARSKY: Correct.
As far back as my
memory reaches,
I cannot remember
a hug or a kiss--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: --any
physical interaction
between my parents and me.
>>REGINA: And that's devastating
to a very sensitive little boy
because one of the things you--
and I talked on the phone
a couple of weeks ago prior
to this, and you said, this is
really kind of a love story.
And that's what I had
grokked out of it, too.
And we're going to get
to that part in a bit,
about being a
brokenhearted lover
or a broken-hearted dreamer
and what that can propel you
toward, obviously.
>>BARSKY: There's a very
insightful friend of mine who,
not too long ago, called me.
I forgot the context.
He said, Jack, you are a lover.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And I was
that when I was a child.
I just didn't figure out how
to love and how to be loved,
and that messed a
lot of things up.
>>REGINA: But you were at heart.
That was your essence.
That's what you were
always looking for.
>>BARSKY: And I still am.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exactly.
And that came through
to me loud and clear,
which is why I was so intrigued
with the spiritual aspect
and psychology of
how your life went.
So now you get to a point--
you're doing great at school.
You're a smart little guy.
You have to.
You got teachers for parents.
You guys are progressing along.
You have a car, and you
go to Berlin on a trip.
>>BARSKY: Now we came
back from the Baltic Sea.
We were on a family vacation.
And we were going to
stop over in Berlin
and go over to the West.
In those days, it
was open, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And buy
some things that you
couldn't get in the east.
So as we get closer to Berlin--
I don't know how close
we got, maybe 20 miles.
The roads were closed,
and we were turned away
and weren't really told why.
And that was August 13, 1961
when the wall was erected,
and I ran right into it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and I
mean, how did your father
respond to this?
How did that feel to suddenly
feel like-- now, you guys are
in a cage, basically?
>>BARSKY: Yeah, but we
bought the propaganda hook,
line, and sinker, so did he.
Remember, at this
time, he was already
a principal of a middle school,
so he would lead the charge
in explaining that we built
the wall to protect us
from the evil
capitalists that were
trying to undermine us and,
just, pretty much take over.
>>REGINA: And the other side
was full of Nazis and Americans,
basically?
>>BARSKY: Absolutely.
Well, but there
were some ex-Nazis
in West German government.
>>REGINA: Oh, sure they were.
Yeah.
But the fear went even
beyond that, right?
>>BARSKY: Sure.
>>REGINA: Yeah, go ahead.
>>BARSKY: And the fact of the
matter was that, actually,
the wall was built
primarily to prevent
more people from leaving.
>>REGINA: From leaving because
they had it better over there.
>>BARSKY: We didn't know that.
Leaving was never, ever
discussed in our household.
My parents were doing well.
Teachers were paid well.
When my father
became a principal,
we lived in a nice house.
And he had a car.
And I mean, he was the first one
in the village who had a car.
We had a good life.
There was no reason to leave.
We also didn't have any close
relatives in the Western part.
So from a selfish point of view,
my dad and, to some extent,
my mother embracing the
socialist propaganda--
>>REGINA: Life was good enough.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, sure.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK, so
that's just like a practical,
this was good.
Finally, we're protected
from the evil ones
on the other side.
>>BARSKY: And you
could rationalize this
really well because we-- you
know, the propaganda had done
its job for us to believe
that the future of the world
would be a communist world,
where everybody gets along,
there's no people who are
suffering because they're not
suppressed by rich people
who take money from them
and all that.
So that sounds not
very bad, doesn't it?
I mean, it sounds really good.
>>REGINA: Everyone's guaranteed
food, clothing, shelter,
and a job.
>>BARSKY: It's a romantic
notion that is very hard not
to embrace as a young person.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
could understand
that, especially that's
your only exposure as well.
You didn't really know what
was happening on the other side
till about 15 years or so later.
>>BARSKY: That is
absolutely right.
>>REGINA: So meanwhile,
you excelled at school.
You went to a really
nice school for--
was it coed, the school
that you went to--
>>BARSKY: Yes, it was.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
the second level.
Your system's a little
different than the West.
>>BARSKY: Right.
>>REGINA: And I just
wrote down, because this
was a classic
education, studying
German, Russian, English,
history, art, music,
philosophy, biology, geography,
you were well educated.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean, it puts
American education to shame.
>>BARSKY: Absolutely true.
And it was acknowledged
when Germany United
that the Eastern
German education system
was superior to the Western.
We were being drilled hammered.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: And it
was hardcore stuff.
Compared to, let's say,
the American system,
we were probably
two years ahead.
What is being taught in
the first years of college
in this country was still
taken care of in high school.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
And as far as philosophy,
you only studied--
in politics, you
only studied Marx.
None of the great German
philosophers, right?
It was all Marx.
>>BARSKY: In high
school, that is correct.
And there was one moment when
we had one class that was--
I can't translate this,
but it was fundamentally
a communist ideology--
Marxism, Leninism, and so forth.
And there was one session
when the teacher brought up
the theme of, what is
the meaning of life?
And his explanation left
me completely empty.
>>REGINA: I remember
that in the book.
Tell us about that.
>>BARSKY: It was
nothing but propaganda.
Like, the meaning of life
is to make life better
for the rest of the world, and
workers of the world unite.
It was all platitudes.
But that didn't answer--
>>REGINA: There was no
depth, no feeling, no spirit.
>>BARSKY: That didn't
answer the questions of,
where did I come from?
Why am I here?
What am I supposed to do?
And where am I going?
None of that.
Couldn't, he
couldn't answer that.
He should have stayed
away from that topic.
The communist ideology does
not have an answer for that.
>>REGINA: Right.
Which leaves a soul deficit,
a spiritual deficit in people
because your being is searching
for something much deeper,
and the system isn't
giving it to you.
>>BARSKY: Correct.
>>REGINA: There's
nowhere to get it.
OK, another part from there
that I found interesting
was November 22, 1963,
when you were in school
and when Kennedy was shot.
And I was very
surprised because I
would have thought it would be a
time of jubilee in East Germany
and Russia.
And how you described that
day wasn't what I expected.
>>BARSKY: We, in the East, and
not necessarily at the party
at the highest level,
but us underlings
romanticized certain
figures in the West.
JFK was one of them, and
Willy Brandt, the West German
chancellor, was the other.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: As a matter of
fact, when he won an election,
it was really close, and I
was in college at that time,
we were all celebrating.
I don't know where
that came from.
>>REGINA: Yeah, what was
it about Kennedy and Brandt
that you kind of romanticized?
What did they represent to you?
>>BARSKY: Well, they were
young, energetic, and didn't
seem to be as hostile towards us
as the rest of the West, right?
Because as you mentioned
before, we were just as afraid
of a war breaking out as the
people in the United States
and West Germany were.
>>REGINA: Sure, we had
military all around you.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And that's, I think, what people
didn't understand because we
can only see our child-like--
through our own fearful
lens of the evil Soviets.
Yeah, there was no nuance there.
>>BARSKY: Now there's one
other thing I need to mention.
>>REGINA: Yes?
>>BARSKY: Kennedy
was obviously one
of the most charismatic
leaders of that century,
and so was Willy Brandt.
Our leaders were-- we
thought they were dumb.
You know, we bought into
the whole concept of where
we were going,
but we always were
hoping for some smarter
people to get to the top.
We had two leaders
during my time there.
One was Walter Ulbricht.
The guy spoke with a
very pronounced Saxonian
accent, which was--
this was despised amongst the--
this was like, ugh.
It was terrible.
>>REGINA: Where does that
accent exist in Germany today
or does it?
>>BARSKY: Leipzig, Dresden.
>>REGINA: Leipzig, OK,
Dresden, all right.
>>BARSKY: And Erich Honecker
he slurred his speech a lot,
not because he drank.
They were both--
>>REGINA: So they
weren't charismatic,
they didn't sound
intelligent, and they
were spewing out ideology
that didn't have a soul.
>>BARSKY: Platitudes.
>>REGINA: Platitudes.
>>BARSKY: As if
they were reading
from the cover page of
the party newspaper,
which nobody ever read.
We always went right
to the sports page.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] Right.
So these people were just
lustrous next to them.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, absolutely.
>>REGINA: Because theoretically,
the people were German.
I mean, Brandt was just on the
other side of my wall, right?
And so you should have had
some of that heart left,
but it sounds like it
was kind of drilled out
of you through the process
of indoctrination, education,
and so forth.
>>BARSKY: Right.
Well, we still know
deep down inside
that we were on
moral high ground,
even though our leaders were
not the most likable people,
none of them.
>>REGINA: OK, so there
are several things
that happened here.
One of them is you
came in at one time--
and I'm kind of hopping
ahead of myself,
but you visited Buchenwald.
This became part of your
philosophical shaping.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And also, there
was a moment when you came
in to a science class, and
the teacher was saying, wait,
listen to that--
beep, beep, with
the Sputnik, right?
>>BARSKY: Now these two
things were a few years apart.
>>REGINA: Yeah, they
were a few years apart,
but I'm just taking a couple
psychologically influential
events.
Because with the Sputnik--
>>BARSKY: The Sputnik pretty
much proved to us that
the Soviet Union was
forging ahead and was--
>>REGINA: The most
powerful, progressive nation
in the world.
>>BARSKY: And then
you had the first man
in space, who was Yuri
Gagarin, a Russian, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: And so
then the Americans--
>>REGINA: You knew you
were on the side of right.
>>BARSKY: Absolutely, not only
emotionally ideologically,
but now also--
>>REGINA: Technologically.
>>BARSKY: --in term terms
of-- technologically,
scientifically.
I mean, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so then, let's talk a
little bit about Buchenwald,
and we're just looking at the
shaping of your patriotism.
>>BARSKY: Yeah,
well, I have no proof
of what I'm going
to say now, but I
believe this was orchestrated
by the party, these visits,
because there was a requirement
for all high school students'
classes in their junior year
to visit a concentration camp.
And the number-one concentration
camp most people would go to
was Buchenwald.
And the exhibits,
they were like--
it was the most horrific things
I've ever seen in my life.
That includes not just pictures
of like piles of corpses,
but real things
like lampshades that
were made out of human skin.
And they were made on behalf of
the wife of the commandant, who
would pick out incoming
prisoners because they
had nice tattoos on them.
And they were
killed and skinned.
To just even think of that a
human being can do something
like that-- a woman--
>>REGINA: No, I couldn't
even look at it.
>>BARSKY: And the
worst thing that you
could see there was shrunken
heads, a couple of them,
the size of my fist.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: Real heads of real
people that, at one point,
sat on somebody's shoulder.
And then came the
decisive moment
where we knew that we were
on the right side of history.
And that was the
juxtaposition of the fact
that the leader of the
Communist Party, Ernst Thalmann,
was moved to Buchenwald just
before the end of the war
and executed there.
The, at that point, leader of
the Bundesnachrichtendienst
which is the
equivalent of the CIA,
was military intelligence
under Hitler.
Think about the two of them.
There was conclusive
evidence that we
were the anti-fascist
section of Germany,
and the Nazis were still
influential in the West.
>>REGINA: But no
one was looking--
>>BARSKY: -- end of story.
>>REGINA: --at the numbers
that Stalin racked up?
>>BARSKY: Oh, no.
OK, Stalin, that's a
whole different story.
>>REGINA: These are brutal,
brutal people on both sides,
but was that story not shared
with you or the numbers
of people that were murdered?
>>BARSKY: Khrushchev, in his
1956 speech, sort of dealt
with the cult of personality.
But do you think
there were details
came out about what
really happened
and how many people were
victimized by Stalin?
This was glossed over.
This was like, oh, yeah,
well, Stalin was a bad guy.
He was a good guy,
but he was a bad guy,
and this cult of
personality wasn't--
we shouldn't have that, like
the same thing happened with Mao
But actually, the details of how
he starved a couple of million
Ukrainians--
>>REGINA: Oh, my gosh.
I mean, so many people died.
>>BARSKY: Peasants, who they
stole the grain from and how he
shot--
he wound up killing
so many people.
>>REGINA: I mean, the
numbers knocked around now,
we're up to 66 million
people died under him.
>>BARSKY: Right.
>>REGINA: I mean, it's
being bandied about.
>>BARSKY: It depends
who does the counting.
>>REGINA: A lot of people.
Tens of millions.
>>BARSKY: The bottom
line, it was glossed over.
It depends upon what
you shine a light on.
And the light was
shined on the fact
that there was some influential
people in West Germany who
had served under Hitler,
and we were the heirs.
We were the self-appointed
heirs of [INAUDIBLE],,
who fought the Nazis.
The communists in the '30s was--
the Communist Party
was the only force
that actually went head
to head, mano y mano,
in the streets with the Nazis.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>BARSKY: Now if they had
won, would the outcome
have been better?
I don't think so.
It would have been dictatorial
in a different way.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
One thing I find interesting,
this whole notion
of propaganda.
I have a German brother-in-law.
Well, first, I went to
the Deutsches Museum.
And I noticed there
wasn't anything
there between the years of--
during the World War II.
All the years of World War II,
the technology and everything,
it was just kind
of a gap, a kind
of missing part of history.
I thought, that's odd.
There was a lot of technological
development at that time.
Then, my brother-in-law, who's
German, from 'Nuremberg, right?
He came over, and
the show "Holocaust"
played in America in the 1970s.
And he was appalled.
He was just devastated
to watch it.
He didn't know any of that.
It wasn't taught in school.
And I mean, you look at
how each of our countries,
in their own way, erase really
significant historical facts so
that we can somehow continue
to live with ourselves
or continue to build whatever
it is that those at the top
desire us to build.
I was absolutely shocked to know
that he knew nothing about it.
>>BARSKY: Mm-hmm.
Yeah, it's--
>>REGINA: How can your
erase all of this?
>>BARSKY: I think you
draw the right parallel.
This is protecting yourself
from of self-destruction
by remembering the bad things
you have done in the past.
This is--
>>REGINA: Or that
your parents did.
You weren't even
part of, you know?
Your grandparents even.
>>BARSKY: Right, and in
the US, it's slavery.
And in Germany,
it's the Holocaust.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BARSKY: There's
a shame, there's
a discomfort that
makes a lot of people
just not want to remember.
Now, for instance, my
grandfather, the forest ranger,
he must have had some
connection to the Nazi party.
My other grandfather,
he served in the Army,
but he didn't do much.
He was hanging out
in Sweden, way north,
where it was cold all the time.
But neither ever, ever
talked about the time
prior to World War II.
There was never any talk
about history in our family.
None.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's what
I learned through his family
as well.
It's just crazy.
>>BARSKY: We want to deny.
We don't want to be reminded.
There's people who have bad
things in their past such as I,
but I have confronted
all of them.
It's a big relief.
If you keep on bottling
it up, you will eventually
die fundamentally unfulfilled.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
OK, now we're going to
speed this story up.
And we're kind of
getting who you
were, how you were educated, the
environment you were raised in.
Now, you're a bright young man.
You're the brightest
of the bright.
You go on to, is
it called, Jena?
>>BARSKY: Jena, yeah.
>>REGINA: Jena, Jena
University, which
is a beautiful building that
was confiscated from people way
back when after the war.
And you fell in love with--
you're excelling at everything,
fabulous at chemistry,
become rising in the
party, youth party.
You're also rising in
your position academically
to the top of your
chemistry department.
And you have fallen in love
with a girl named Rosie.
>>BARSKY: Now she
was in high school.
>>REGINA: Let's go back.
OK, so you fell in love with
Rosie in high school, right.
And your heart is just,
like, all in, right?
>>BARSKY: All in.
I was 16.
I started developing
crushes on girls
in seventh and eighth grade.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>BARSKY: And they
were from a distance.
But I knew, I loved
this one, and I really--
I didn't know how to
even get close to them.
>>REGINA: They were
these mysterious beings.
>>BARSKY: Angelic, wonderful,
to be admired from a distance,
and I was just too shy to even--
just, like, be near them.
And then, I went to high
school, and this was a coed--
we were in a dorm where
the girls and boys were
in the same big, old villa.
And initially, I targeted
one of the girls,
and she just was
teasing me all the time.
And then, Rosie came in.
And she sort of
introduced herself.
And that was the first time that
a girl paid attention to me,
and it felt good.
And at the end of 10th grade,
we were holding hands already.
And then, we came back from
vacation, and she told me,
I've reconnected
with my boyfriend.
Her boyfriend was a
college student already.
So now, I'm chasing after
this girl for an entire year.
I made myself useful.
I hung around.
I carried her bags.
I helped her with math.
Through deeds, I figured
I could get her back,
and I actually did.
When we came back from
vacation into our senior year,
she told me, I broke
up with this other guy.
And so we were an item
for an entire year.
It was bliss.
It was so wonderful.
Literally, I
dedicated my future--
and it was at a point where I
really kicked in academically.
I started getting all A's
because I started actually--
I started working at it.
And I knew that I was going
to have a great career,
and it was all and
dedication to her.
>>REGINA: To Rosie.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
And the entire school knew that
we were going to get married.
We were already an item.
We were together all the time.
And I had my first sexual
encounter at the age 18.
So everything was wonderful,
and I just couldn't wait to--
she went to study in
Berlin and I in Jena.
And those two cities were, in
those days, very far apart.
We didn't have any cars,
and public transportation
took forever.
So the only communication
was through mail,
and she broke up
with me via letter.
God, my world fell apart.
You understand, when you
focus on this one thing,
this one person and that person
goes away, now you really
don't know what's the
meaning of your life anymore.
I thought I had
found the meaning,
serving Rosie, and
that disappeared,
which made a big dent
in my emotional self.
It hardened me.
And I dated some girls, but
it took two years for me
to even date another
girl in college.
And I always kept
them at arm's length.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you became
kind of one of the guys.
You were playing basketball.
You were really, really
working hard academically.
>>BARSKY: And I had
some girlfriends,
but I didn't want
to get to close.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
wouldn't let them close.
>>BARSKY: Because I had made an
experience that was so painful.
I didn't want to live
through it again.
And the fact that I didn't
have a strong relationship
with anybody at the time
the KGB recruited me,
that was one of the--
>>REGINA: It's a criteria.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And it helped
me just disappear.
I had nothing that kept
me, nothing strong enough
to keep me back in Germany.
>>REGINA: No emotional ties.
>>BARSKY: That's correct.
Not my mother--
>>REGINA: And that's
really critical.
>>BARSKY: --and not
with a female interest.
>>REGINA: So now, let's get to
that part where the KGB has--
how they started reaching
out to you initially
and what drew you in.
Because there were
some things that
sounded pretty
titillating and wonderful.
>>BARSKY: Well, yeah, in the
US, you had your James Bond.
We had our version
of James Bond.
We called them
"Scouts for Peace."
That was the East German
spies that primarily
would go into the
West and do some work
to uncover fascists
and just, like,
help us protect ourselves.
There were also some
historic figures
that are mostly communist
that had spied or fought
for the Soviet Union.
It was a famous
spy, Richard Sorge,
who was a German communist
that was a journalist in Japan.
And he sent extremely
valuable information
to the Soviet Union,
which Stalin ignored.
And when he was
caught, Stalin denied
that they ever had a connection
until he was executed.
That part of the
story, we didn't know.
But anyway, there
was a romantic notion
about folks like that
who would go and do
this heroic stuff
in the West while,
also, enjoying the good life.
But that came with
the territory.
So when that was presented
to me, I said, wow.
>>REGINA: You could see how
the higher ups in the party
were living anyway.
I mean, they did have
certain perks, right?
>>BARSKY: It wasn't
that obvious.
It was reasonably well managed.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>BARSKY: You had to
be really high up.
Like, for instance, the local
party officials, most of
them were--
there was part time, and
even if it was full time,
they didn't get the perks.
It wasn't really--
>>REGINA: And you weren't
exposed to the high-ups yet?
>>BARSKY: No.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK, so now--
>>BARSKY: Actually, I was
never exposed to the high-ups.
I never knew how high on
the hog the elite of the KGB
was living in Moscow.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, we read about it here.
So for you, you
have paid your dues.
You're loyal to the party.
And now, they reach out to you.
Talk about how they
originally reached out to you.
>>BARSKY: Yeah,
that was as awkward
as it could get because the
fellow that initially made
contact with me
on a Saturday, he
knocked on the door of
my college dorm room
and introduced himself
as a representative
of the local, world-famous
optics factory.
And he was going to talk
to me about my plans after
graduation, which was totally
stupid because anybody who knew
anything about that system
in those days knew that you
don't--
nobody recruited.
You weren't recruited
out of college.
You were assigned.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: So it was
all centrally planned.
So the moment he said that, I
knew that he was full of it.
And I also guessed, rightly,
that he was probably Stasi.
He was German.
It turns out he most likely was
a collaborator with the KGB.
They had their own local guys.
And this was an
interesting Kabuki dance
because I knew that he wasn't
who he pretended to be,
but he probably didn't know
that his lie didn't work.
So I was playing with him.
I could have, at any point,
made him look really foolish,
but I didn't.
I just wanted to know
where he's going--
curiosity.
And then, eventually,
he came out
with this question,
where he said--
he admitted, look, I'm
really not from that company.
I'm working with the government.
Could you imagine yourself
to work for the government
one of these days?
And so I gave him the answer
that he wanted, without us ever
determining what part of
the government that was.
I said, yes, but
not as a chemist.
And so he had the answer
that he wanted, so he
went back to his boss there and
said, the guy's ready to talk.
And the next time,
he introduced me
to somebody who spoke German
with a Russian accent.
And unceremoniously,
he introduced him.
He said, this is Herman,
and we're working
with our Soviet friends.
And before you know
it, he said goodbye.
I never knew this guy's name.
And now I was with Herman.
I was with the KGB--
1, 2, 3.
You know, what?
The KGB was the most powerful--
and it probably, in history,
has been the most
powerful intelligence
agency in the world.
And it was part of the Soviet
Union, the mighty Soviet Union,
and they wanted me.
>>REGINA: That's
very flattering.
>>BARSKY: Flattery,
flattery gets you very far.
>>REGINA: Because as you
say in your own book,
you were not a particularly
humble young man.
>>BARSKY: No, no.
>>REGINA: You knew
you were good.
You knew you were smart.
You know you were kind
of full of yourself.
>>BARSKY: I was.
I didn't express it openly.
>>REGINA: No, because you
did have a certain charisma
and gentility.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, I
was pretty likable.
But internally, I
knew I was the best.
And it was fed into
me from all sides.
Even when I messed up, the party
officials chose to ignore it.
I fathered a child
out of wedlock.
I should have been
reprimanded in a big way.
Nobody ever even mentioned this
because I was a rising star.
So now, the KGB comes in.
This is the next level.
You got to at least
figure out what that is.
>>REGINA: Well, and
even in your original
meetings where you
would be taken,
you had lovely tea
and biscuits, and you
were allowed to even read
Western magazines now.
>>BARSKY: That's right.
>>REGINA: This was a big deal.
>>BARSKY: I was allowed to
live outside of the law,
outside of the rules,
because I was never
really comfortable with rules.
>>REGINA: You'd go to read Der
Spiegel so you could find out
what was happening in Germany
and the whole Western world.
That's their Time magazine.
>>BARSKY: Right, and
as time progressed,
I was encouraged to learn as
much as possible about the West
because I was going to
operate there, right?
So that put me in another
special category of people who
could live outside of the law.
You have your cake
and eat it, too.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: Right?
This is, of course,
intellectually dishonest,
but who cares?
The selfish part of me
really enjoyed that.
>>REGINA: Well, you're
a young man untethered,
and you're being flattered
at every single level,
getting access to things
other people that you know
would never have access to.
So you can understand what the
appeal would be to a young man.
>>BARSKY: Absolutely, yeah.
And dialed back-- people ask
me, would you do it again?
And I say, knowing
what I knew then
and being who I was
then, absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yeah, sure
you'd do it again.
It's your right.
And most people
probably would have,
given the same opportunity.
And you already
kind of passed over,
but you had this child out
of wedlock as well, right?
And now, the party,
interestingly
because you were
who you were, let
you have a relationship, which
that's not usually desirable.
>>BARSKY: Now we're
going forward.
That was the KGB.
>>REGINA: You were KGB.
I want to start getting into
that, into the KGB part now.
So you're out of school.
Give us the chronology on this.
Because at one point--
I mean, you were
still in school.
They'd have you kind
of give information
on some of your fellow
students, observe them, see
what you could give,
who's potentially
a problem or a gain, whatever.
So you had to do that.
Now how does that feel?
These were your friends
or, at least, colleagues.
>>BARSKY: Well, I
thought it was OK.
I never really wrote a
lot of derogatory things.
I believe this was
mostly training because--
>>REGINA: Powers of observation.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, the Stasi did
a good job watching everybody,
and I don't think that
the KGB was very much
interested in the
internals of East Germany.
So for instance,
when my friend and I
hitchhiked across
Eastern Europe,
I had to write a report
about each country.
This was -- they just wanted
to see my analytical abilities,
and my ability to read
people, and all that.
Nowadays, I wouldn't
do something like that.
But in those days, to
me, that was, again--
>>REGINA: It didn't
feel creepy back then.
>>BARSKY: Even if I wrote
about somebody who--
most of us students were
toeing the line, like 90%.
And there was some
troublemakers.
And the troublemakers had
to be dealt with, right?
And I didn't feel bad about it.
But that is part of the answer,
where good Germans actually
went along with Hitler because
there were troublemakers there,
too, and they had
to be dealt with.
And they sort of were
working on destroying
the collective vision, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
And you're now in the
Soviet version of that.
>>BARSKY: Yep.
>>REGINA: So now travel
and exploring other lands
in the name of the work has
been dangled before you.
And you're gonna get
to leave East Germany.
>>BARSKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That's a big deal.
And they started
training you slowly.
I was very interested in
a couple of things there.
One, you get to pass through the
wall and go into West Germany.
>>BARSKY: Right, that
was a training trip.
>>REGINA: What an eye-opener.
>>BARSKY: That was actually
a very critical moment
because not everybody
actually could do that--
>>REGINA: Yeah, that
was interesting.
>>BARSKY: --and survive.
>>REGINA: Why could
they not-- because it
blew their perceptions of
life and it just destroyed
everything they had believed?
>>BARSKY: No, you would
have to ask my classmate
Hans [INAUDIBLE],,
who I met in Berlin
and who shared with
me that he actually
was supposed to go to West
Germany as an undercover agent
on behalf of the Stasi.
And when he made his
first trip to West Berlin,
he came back and
says, I can't do this.
It's too much pressure.
This was enemy territory.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah, no.
I mean, we don't get-- this is--
truly, you're going into
the den of the devil.
>>BARSKY: The unknown.
So as I emerged from--
there was a connection.
You could go by a subway
from east to west,
except you had to
pass by a KGB--
>>REGINA: Which you were
authorized to do, yeah.
>>BARSKY: Right.
So as I emerged in Western
territory and I saw my first--
the first policeman
in uniform, I thought,
he should know that I'm not--
>>REGINA: Arrest you, shoot
you, something on the spot.
Yeah.
>>BARSKY: Whatever, yeah.
And the first trip was nothing.
It was just, go there,
walk around, take a trip--
>>REGINA: Have some
sausage and beer.
>>BARSKY: [LAUGHS] Have
sausage and beer and come back.
And then, how did it go?
It was OK.
It was a very important
test because we were, like,
so trained that everything
over there is really bad.
>>REGINA: Evil, yeah.
>>BARSKY: And evil.
>>REGINA: But you said
something really interesting.
You said, once this
happened and you came back,
it was though you went from
a world in black and white
to one in color.
>>BARSKY: [LAUGHS] Yes.
>>REGINA: You saw light.
You saw people moving freely,
having high-quality foods
and automobiles.
>>BARSKY: Yeah,
the contrast was--
it just hit you.
You could not possibly
overlook that.
And I've met other people who
went mostly from West to East
in those days.
We didn't have enough paint.
We didn't have enough color.
It was all brown and gray.
And at night, it was dark.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And I go
over there and, like,
even the policemen uniforms,
they were light blue.
They looked pretty nice.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] Yeah.
And so, I mean, it's hard
for us to understand this
because anyone who was
born in America-- and i
mean, you just take all of
this for granted, of course.
>>BARSKY: Sure.
Right.
>>REGINA: So you went into this
color world, you came back,
you weren't killed,
nobody recognized you
as anything other than a young
German man, you spoke German.
And your name, at the time, your
birth name, Albrecht, right?
>>BARSKY: I went
with my real name,
with a real East German
passport where you--
it had an entry, allowed
to travel to the West.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And your name was?
>>BARSKY: Albrecht Dittrich.
>>REGINA: Dittrich.
I can't say the last name right.
Say it again.
I want to see if I can get it.
>>BARSKY: Al-brecht.
>>REGINA: That part, I can get.
>>BARSKY: Dit-trich.
>>REGINA: Dittrich.
>>BARSKY: Yeah, Not bad.
>>REGINA: OK.
So that's who you were born as.
So, OK, you pass the
muster, OK, you did it.
You came back.
Now, things intensify.
Now, the KGB is interested.
At what point did you
understand they were
preparing you to go to America?
>>BARSKY: That
was serendipitous.
I was told that everybody
who was being prepared
for an illegal existence
in another country
had to learn yet
another language.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>BARSKY: And I was
given the choice.
And since English was
really super easy for me
in high school,
I picked English.
And so I threw myself into--
in those days, whatever
I tackled, I went 110%--
and I threw myself
into studying English.
First, I had a couple of tutors.
And then, I did it on my own.
I would read two,
three hours a day.
And every new word that
I found, I would learn.
And so one day, I had a visitor
from the center, which is
Moscow, this in headquarters.
And we were talking,
and he asked me about,
how's your English?
And I pulled a book out written
in English, and it was a novel.
I said, I can read this
without the dictionary.
He said, ooh.
So a light went up on him.
So next thing is I
get a tape recorder,
and they ask me to say
something in English.
And even in those days, even
though I had a much heavier
accent, but my accent was--
I had the ability
to emulate sounds.
>>REGINA: Yeah, just
mimic the sound.
>>BARSKY: Mimic sounds.
I mimicked German comedians.
I had this innate ability to
speak sort of like others.
And so the accent was
significantly less than what
you would expect from a German.
They took this to some
teachers in Moscow,
and they said, let's bring
him over here and test him.
So next thing, I'm on a plane
to Moscow, my first flight.
And I get to talk to a couple
of people, one an American,
and another one a
college teacher,
a Russian who taught English.
And we were talking
back and forth.
And then, they made a decision.
And it was a tie.
One said you can't do it;
the other one said you can.
And wishful thinking took
over and says, give it a try.
And that is when they moved
me to Moscow to train,
primarily to learn English
as well as one can,
to be then launched
to the United States.
>>REGINA: And this went on for
a long time and longer than you
expected.
>>BARSKY: Two years.
And this was like
a promotion to me.
There were hundreds of agents
of East Germans in the West.
I would have been one of those.
Now, I was going to
be really special.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
So you moved to Moscow, the
intense training begins,
you're treated in a special way.
As a young man,
you even get to go
to the Bolshoi Ballet, things
the average person can't ever
do.
>>BARSKY: Right, and I cut in
front of the line to see Lenin.
>>REGINA: Ah.
>>BARSKY: That line was--
>>REGINA: Yeah, oh, yeah.
>>BARSKY: As an
ordinary human being,
you would line up at the end,
and it would take almost a day
to get in to get there.
We would-- right in the front.
>>REGINA: So you were
really special now.
>>BARSKY: Sure.
>>REGINA: And you
were starting to enjoy
some of the perks of life
as well by the time you
get to Russia a little bit.
>>BARSKY: Only what
we just mentioned.
>>REGINA: Just the Bolshoi?
>>BARSKY: Well,
you know, there was
a big, negative kind of
weight, and it was loneliness.
>>REGINA: Oh, no doubt.
>>BARSKY: Right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: I was all
by myself, and I
wasn't supposed to become
friends with people there.
The only interaction
with other human beings
was in the context of training.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: And initially, the
apartment that they had me in
wasn't that great, either.
But eventually, I got a really--
given Soviet conditions, I
got a really nice apartment
with a color TV.
It was way too big for me.
Yes, by comparison, I
was really well treated.
Food, I still had to
take care of myself,
and there weren't a whole lot
of things you could buy and eat
in the stores.
>>REGINA: My whole family
went over to Russia
during that period of
time during the Cold War.
My parents went, my sister,
my niece, my brother in law.
They all went during
that time and came back.
They wanted to bring gifts.
And they brought me this
horrible toothpaste.
I mean, there wasn't
anything to bring.
She said, well, here's
some of their toothpaste,
just to see kind of
what the life is like.
I just remember being
shocked at just how bad it
was in terms of
availability of food
stuffs and any other supplies.
>>BARSKY: Their version
of the supermarket
was significantly poorer than
what we had in East Germany.
And it was sort
of the equivalent
of the gray and brown in terms
of the way East Germany looked
when you came from the West.
Huge spaces stocked with
mineral water and can't fish.
And occasionally, they
had something else.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right.
I remember hearing that.
>>BARSKY: The only good thing
that you could get everyday
was bread.
>>REGINA: Bread, yeah.
>>BARSKY: Freshly baked bread.
>>REGINA: Yeah, well, thank god.
>>BARSKY: And it
was really good.
>>REGINA: Any butter?
Not necessarily?
>>BARSKY: Depending on
what day of the week.
>>REGINA: So I had
it written down here.
Including your training,
you had to really learn
about how you go undetected.
So this whole
movement that spies--
this is where it gets
intriguing for those of us
who devour shows
like "The Americans"
and every other spy
show, and John le Carre
novel, and everything else,
is the actual craft training
had started at this time.
And you had people
following you, right?
>>BARSKY: Right, yeah.
>>REGINA: And also at this time,
you were studying Morse code,
secret writing, photography,
cryptography, dead drops,
all the things we've read
about in our spy novels that--
>>BARSKY: It's all real.
>>REGINA: It's all real.
So you were classically
trained in all
of that at the same time.
And you seemed to have
a knack for the ability
to go undetected and
also a really high skill
at observation to know
when someone was there
and something was out of order.
So you were really a rock
star at this in your training.
>>BARSKY: The person who
trained me was probably one
of the top surveillance folks.
And he worked with a whole
team or multiple teams.
And at one point, he
paid me the compliment,
he says that I was one of
the best he ever worked with.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And it had something
to do with my ability
to remember faces.
See, this is how this works.
When you are being followed--
and, typically, the size
of the team that follows
you could be anywhere between a
half a dozen to a dozen folks,
and they would change positions
as to who's the closest, right?
But there are
situations-- and you
have find the places
where they must come
close to see what you're up to.
Because 10 seconds of--
when you're out of sight,
you could be doing something,
and they never
know what you did.
>>REGINA: Right, make a--
pass off--
>>BARSKY: Yes.
>>REGINA: The detail
and awareness, I mean,
that's what really got me
is the amount of detail
that they put you through.
>>BARSKY: Yes.
Well, but I was one
of only 10 that they
trained in that time frame.
And the head of department
S, which is illegals--
once you retired and the
Soviet Union was no more,
gave an interview, where he
was talking about illegals.
And he said, we literally
scanned hundreds of candidates.
And even the ones that made
it to the list of finalists,
even many of those didn't
work out in the end.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>BARSKY: It is what it is.
I'm not bragging.
>>REGINA: No, you
were that bright.
You were the best and brightest.
>>BARSKY: And some of that
was just not acquired.
It was given to me, like the
ability to remember faces,
getting back to--
if you saw the same face
twice, regardless of what else
they were wearing and whether
they had different hair,
you knew that somebody
was following-- twice
within three hours.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: And now, I'm bragging.
This was a contest.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: This team was
training for themselves
because they were training to,
for instance, follow CIA folks
and so forth, and they wanted
to be not detected, right?
So they were writing a report,
and I was writing a report.
And in the end, it was team 0--
>>REGINA: It was a competition.
>>BARSKY: Team 0, me 10.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>BARSKY: I beat
them every time.
>>REGINA: And this
is where we're
going to end the first
part of the conversation,
and then we're going to pick up
the second part, where, OK, you
passed.
You're the best and brightest.
Now, they sent you
off to Canada first
to get to the quote kind of
"America light" lifestyle.
And then, you meet situations
you'd never encountered,
where you just absolutely
had a cold sweat.
And one of them had to do with
twist-off bottle caps on a beer
bottle.
And we're going to pick that
story up when we come back.
It's been an absolute delight.
It was a delight
reading your book.
It's been a delight
talking with you.
And I very much look forward
to our second conversation.
>>BARSKY: Same here.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: As you can tell,
we could talk for hours more.
At least, we get one
more hour out of this.
So to get the
story yourself, you
can go purchase
"Deep Undercover"
at any major bookseller.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME SONG]